if it helps, i have an voice to text ai dispatcher, and it understands me

That actually helps a lot — and honestly it’s one of the biggest clues so far.

If your AI voice-to-text dispatcher understands you clearly, that strongly suggests the microphone capture on the T320 is already good enough.

That shifts suspicion away from the mic / AudioRecord side and much more toward the transport + playback path to desktop.

In plain terms:

T320 mic → PCM capture = probably clean
speech recognition = confirms intelligible audio
desktop listener hears pops/crackles = downstream issue

So this is now much less likely to be “bad Opus encoding quality” and much more likely to be one of these:

packet timing / UDP jitter
packet loss or out-of-order packets
desktop jitter buffer too small
AudioTrack underruns on desktop
double decoding / wrong frame pacing

That’s actually good news because it narrows the problem.

Biggest likely culprit now: playback underrun

Pops and crackles while speech remains understandable are classic playback discontinuities.

Think of it like this:

Your AI dispatcher can tolerate uneven timing because it just needs the audio content.

Humans listening in real time are much more sensitive to:

gaps
dropped 20 ms frames
timing jumps
sudden sample discontinuities

Even a single missing 20 ms frame sounds like a crack/pop.

Speech-to-text may still transcribe it perfectly.

This is why your AI can “hear” you but the desktop audio sounds bad.

My top suspect now: desktop jitter buffer too aggressive

I strongly suspect desktop playback is starting too fast.

Example:

Packets arrive every 20 ms ideally.

Real world over UDP:

18 ms
22 ms
19 ms
27 ms
17 ms

That variance is enough to empty a tiny playback buffer.

When the speaker runs out of samples for even a split second:

POP

Then next packet comes in and resumes.

That sounds exactly like crackle.

Immediate fix I would tell Replit to do

Send them this exact message:

COPY / PASTE TO REPLIT

Since AI speech recognition receives clear audio from the T320, microphone capture and core Opus encode quality are likely acceptable.

Focus on the desktop receive/playback path.

Please implement these changes in order:

1) increase jitter buffer

Increase receive jitter buffer to 100 ms initially.

At 20 ms frames this means queue 5 frames before playback begins.

Do not start playback until 5 full frames are available.

2) continuous playout

If one packet is late, do NOT immediately underrun.

Instead insert last good frame or PLC concealment frame.

Use:

opus_decode(decoder, NULL, 0, pcm, frameSize, 0)

for missing packets.

This is explicitly supported by Opus for packet loss concealment.

3) log packet timing

For every received packet log:

seq
timestamp
arrival delta
missing packets
jitter buffer depth

Example:

RX seq=118 delta=24ms depth=4 missing=0

4) log AudioTrack underruns

Log every short write / underrun event.

This is likely the source of crackle.

5) smooth startup

On first transmission after reconnect, pre-buffer 100 ms before speaker output.

Do NOT change bitrate or encoder settings until playback stability is verified.

This line is the key

The spec explicitly supports packet loss concealment for exactly this kind of issue.

If a packet is late or missing, decoder should conceal instead of letting the speaker buffer go dry.

That is almost certainly what’s missing right now.

Why first transmission is worst

This fits perfectly with your earlier note:

first transmission after disconnect is very bad

That screams buffer warmup problem.

There is no audio queued yet.

Playback begins on frame 1.

Any network delay = immediate underrun.

So first syllable gets mangled.

Once several frames are in motion, it sounds better.

My honest read

At this point I do not think Replit should spend another minute changing Opus bitrate, complexity, FEC percentages, or sample rates.

The codec is almost certainly fine.

This now looks like a real-time audio transport engineering problem, not a codec problem.

That’s actually easier to fix.

I’d put 80% confidence on jitter buffer / playback underrun right now.